Most of the time I do not read my talks.
I plan the main points and then speak off
the top
of my head, but for this talk I need to stick
to a text and for good cause.
Please bear with me.
I think you know what a man is.
A woman is more or less like a man, but not
of the same
sex.
This may seem like a strange thing for me
to start with, but soon you will see why.
Next, I shall say that a person is a woman
or a man- young or old.
And to keep things
short, when I say 'he' I mean 'he or she,'
and when I say 'his' I mean 'his or her.'
A machine is a thing that can do a task with
no help, or not much help, from a person.
As a rule, we can speak of two or more of
a thing if we add an 's' or 'z' sound to the
end
of a word that names it.
These are names of persons: Alan Turing, Alonzo
Church, Charles Kay Ogden, Christopher
Alexander, Eric Raymond, Fred Brooks, John
Horton Conway, James Gosling, Bill Joy, and
Dick Gabriel.
The word 'other' means 'not the same.'
The phrase 'other than' means 'not the same
as.'
A number may be nought, or may be one more
than a number.
In this way we have a set of
numbers with no bound.
There are other numbers as well, but I shall
not speak more of them yet.
These numbers — nought or one more than
a number — can be used to count things.
We can add
two numbers if we count up from the first
number while we count down from the number
that
is not the first till it comes to nought;
then the first count is the sum.
We shall take the word 'many' to mean 'more
than two — more than two in number.'
Think of a machine that can keep track of
two numbers, and count each one up or down,
and
test if a number be nought and by such a test
choose to do this or that.
The list of
things that it can do and of choices that
it can make must be of a known size that is
some
number.
Here you can see the two numbers and a list.
The machine starts its work with the first
row of the list.
Each row in the list has a state name; the
word 'up' or 'down'; and which
number to count up or count down.
For 'up,' we have the name of the next state
to go to-
and the machine counts the number up by one;
for 'down,' the machine first tests the
number, and so we have the name of the new
state to go to if the number be nought and
the
name of the new state to go to if the number
be other than nought- in which case the
machine counts the number down by one.
A computer is a machine that can do at least
what that machine can and we have good cause
to think that if a computer task can be done
at all, then the two number machine can do
it, too, if you put numbers in and read them
out in the right way.
In some sense, all
computers are the same; we know this thanks
to the work of such persons as Alan Turing
and
Alonzo Church.
A vocabulary is a set of words.
A language is a vocabulary and rules for what
a string of
words might mean to a person or a machine
that hears them.
To define a word is to tell what it means.
When you define a word, you add it to your
vocabulary and to the vocabulary of each person
who hears you.
Then you can use the word.
To program is to make up a list of things
to do and choices to make, to be done by a
computer.
Such a list is called a program.
Next, a noun can be made from a verb to mean
that which is done as meant by the verb; to
make such a noun, we add 'ing' to the verb
stem.
Thus we can speak of 'programming.'
A programming language is a language that
we can use to tell a computer a program
to do.
Java is a brand name for a computer programming
language.
I shall speak of the
Java programming language a great deal more
in this talk.
I have to say the full phrase
'the Java programming language,' for there
is a guy who works where I do who deals with
the laws of marks of trade, and he told me
I have to say it that way.
Names of other
programming languages are Fortran, APL, Pascal,
and PL/I.
A part of a program that does define a new
word for use in other parts of the program
is called a definition.
Not all programming languages have a way to
code definitions, but
most do.
Those that do not are for wimps.
Should a programming language be large or
small?
A small programming language
might take but a short time to learn.
A large programming language may take a long,
long
time to learn, but then it is less hard to
use, for then we have a lot of words at hand—
or, I should say, at the tips of our tongues—to
use at the drop of a hat.
If we start with
a small language, then in most cases we can
not say much at the start.
We must first
define more words; then we can speak of the
main thing that is on our mind.
We can use a verb in the past tense if we
add a 'd' or 'ed' sound at the end of the
verb.
In the same way we can form what we call a
past participle, which is a form of the
verb that says of a noun that what the verb
means has been done to it.
For this talk, I wanted to show you what it
is like to use a language that is much too
small.
You have now had a good taste of it.
I must next define a few more words.
An example is some one thing, out of a set
of things, that I put in front of you so that
you can see how some part of that thing is
in fact a part of each thing in the set.
A syllable is a bit of sound that a mouth
and tongue can say all at one time, more or
less, in a smooth way.
Each word is made up of one or more syllables.
A primitive is a word for which we can take
it for granted that we all know what it
means.
For this talk, I chose to take as my primitives
all the words of one syllable, and no
more, from the language I use for most of
my speech each day, which is called English.
My firm rule for this talk is that if I need
to use a word of two or more syllables, I
must first define it.
Thank you, now you see.
I can do this by defining one word at a time—and
I have done so—or I can
give a rule by which a new word can be made
from some other known word, so that many
new words can be defined at once—and I have
done this as well.
This choice, to start with just words of one
syllable, was why I had to define the word
'woman' but could take the word 'man' for
granted.
I wanted to define 'machine' in terms of the
word 'person', and it seemed least hard to
define 'person' as 'a man or a woman.'
But then by chance, the word 'man' has one
syllable
and so is a primitive, in English, but the
word 'woman' has two syllables and so I had
to
define it.
In a language other than English, the words
that mean 'man' and 'woman'
might each have one syllable—or might each
have two syllables, in which case one would
have to take some other tack.
We have to do this a lot when we write real
computer programs: a thought that seems
like a primitive in our minds turns out not
to be a primitive in a programming language,
and in each new program we must define it
once more.
A good example of this is max,
which yields the more large of two numbers.
It is a primitive thought to me, but few
programming languages have it as a primitive;
I have to define it.
This is the sort of
thing that makes a computer look like a person
who is but four years old.
Next to English,
all computer programming languages are small;
as we write code, we must stop now and then
to define some new term that we will need
to use in more than one place.
Some persons
find that their programs have a few large
chunks of code that do the 'real work' plus
a
large pile of small bits of code that define
new words, so to speak, to be used as if they
were primitives.
I hope that this talk brings home to you—in
a way you can feel in your heart, not just
think in your head—what it is like to have
to program in that way.
This should show you,
true to life, what it is like to use a small
language.
Each time I have tried this sort of
thing, I have found that I can not say much
at all till I take the time to define at least
a few new terms.
In other words, if you want to get far at
all with a small language, you
must first add to the small language to make
a language that is more large.
In some cases we will find it more smooth
to add the syllable 'er' to the end of a
word than to use the word 'more' in front
of it; in this way we might say 'smoother'
in place of 'more smooth.'
Let me add that better means 'more good.'
In truth, the words of one syllable form quite
a rich vocabulary, with which you can say
many things.
You may note that this vocabulary is much
larger than that of the language
called Basic English, defined by Charles Kay
Ogden in the year one nine three nought.
I chose not to use Basic English for this
talk, for the cause being that Basic English
has
many words of two or more syllables, some
of them quite long, handed down to us from
the
dim past of Rome.
While Basic English has fewer words, it does
not give the feel, to one who
speaks full English, of being a small language.
By the way, from now on I shall use the word
because to mean 'the cause being that.'
If we look at English and then at programming
languages, we see that all our programming
languages seem small.
And yet we can say, too, in some cases, that
one programming
language is smaller than some other programming
language.
A design is a plan for how to build a thing.
To design is to build a thing in one’s mind
but not yet in the real world—or, better
yet, to plan how the real thing can be built.
The main thing that I want to ask in this
talk is: If I want to help other persons to
write all sorts of programs, should I design
a small programming language or a large one?
I stand on this claim: I should not design
a small language, and I should not design
a large one.
I need to design a language that can grow.
I need to plan ways in which it
might grow—but I need, too, to leave some
choices so that other persons can make those
choices at a later time.
This is not a new thought.
We have known for some time that huge programs
can not
be coded from scratch all at once.
There has to be a plan for growth.
What we must
think on now is the fact that languages have
now reached that large size where they
can not be designed all at once, much less
built all at once.
Let me pause to define some names for numbers.
Twenty is twice ten.
Thirty is thrice
ten.
Forty is twice twenty.
A hundred is ten times ten.
A million is a hundred times a
hundred times a hundred.
Sixteen is twice eight.
Seven is one plus six.
Fifty is one more
than seven squared.
One more thing: ago means 'in the past, counting
back from now.'
In the past, it made sense to design a whole
language, once for all.
Fortran was a small
language forty years ago, designed for tasks
with numbers, and it served well.
PL/I was
thought a big language thirty years ago, but
now we would think of it as small.
Pascal
was designed as a small, whole language with
no plan to add to it later.
That
was five and twenty years ago.
What came to pass?
Fortran has grown and grown.
Many new words and new rules have been added.
The
new design is not bad; the parts fit well,
one with the other.
But to many programmers who
have used Fortran for a long time, the Fortran
of here and now is not at all the same as
the language they first came to know and love.
It looks strange.
PL/I has not grown much.
It is, for the most part, just as it was when
it first came
out.
It may be that this is just from lack of use.
The flip side is that the lack of use
may have two causes.
Number one: PL/I was not designed to grow—it
was designed to be all
things to all who program right from the start.
Number two: for its time, it started out
large.
No one knew all of PL/I; some said that no
one could know all of PL/I.
Pascal grew just a tad and was used to build
many large programs.
One main fault of
the first design was that strings were hard
to use because they were all of fixed size.
Pascal would have been of no use for the building
of large programs for use in the real
world if this had not been changed.
But Wirth had not planned for the language
to change
in such ways, and in fact few changes were
made.
At times we think of C as a small language
designed from whole cloth.
But it grew
out of a smaller language called B, and has
since grown to be a larger language called
C
plus plus.
A language as large as C plus plus could not
have spread so wide if it had been
foisted on the world all at once.
It would have been too hard to port.
One more rule for making words: if we add
the syllable 'er' to a verb stem, we make
a noun that names a person or thing that does
what the verb says to do.
For example, a
buyer is one who buys.
A user is one who does use.
As you may by now have guessed, I am of like
mind with my good friend Dick Gabriel,
here in the front row, who wrote the well
known screed 'Worse Is Better'.
The real name
was 'Lisp: Good News, Bad News, How to Win
Big,' which is all words of just one syllable—
which might seem like good luck for me, but
the truth is that Dick Gabriel knew how to
choose words with punch.
Yet what first comes to mind for most persons
is the part headed
'Worse Is Better' and so that's how they cite
it.
The gist of it is that the best way to get
a language used by many persons is not to
design and build 'The Right Thing,' because
that will take too long.
In a race, a small
language with warts will beat a well designed
language because users will not wait for the
right thing; they will use the language that
is quick and cheap, and put up with the
warts.
Once a small language fills a niche, it is
hard to take its place.
Well, then, could not 'The Right Thing' be
a small language, not hard to port but
with no warts?
I guess it could be done, but I, for one,
am not that smart-or have not had that much
luck.
But in fact I think it can not be done.
Five and twenty years ago, when users did
not want that much from a language, one could
try.
Scheme was my best shot at it.
But users will not now with glad cries glom
on to a language that gives them no more
than what Scheme or Pascal gave them.
They need to paint bits, lines, and boxes
on the
screen in hues bright and wild; they need
to talk to printers and servers through the
net;
they need to load code on the fly; they need
their programs to work with other code they
don’t trust; they need to run code in many
threads and on many machines; they need to
deal with text and sayings in all the world’s
languages.
A small programming language
just won’t cut it.
So a small language can not do the job right
and a large language takes too long to
get off the ground.
Are we doomed to use small languages with
many warts because that
is the sole kind of design that can make it
in the world?
At one time this thought filled me with gloom.
But then I saw a gap in my thinking.
I said that users will not wait for 'The Right
Thing,' but will use what comes first and
put up with the warts.
But—users will not put up with the warts
for all time.
It is not
long till they scream and moan and beg for
changes.
The small language will grow.
The
warts will be shaved off or patched.
If one person does all the work, then growth
will be slow.
But if one lets the users help
do the work, growth can be quick.
If many persons work side by side, and the
best work
is added with care and good taste, a great
deal can be added in a short time.
APL was designed by one man, a smart man—and
I love APL—but it had a flaw that
I think has all but killed it: there was no
way for a user to grow the language in a
smooth way.
In most languages, a user can define at least
some new words to stand for
other pieces of code that can then be called,
in such a way that the new words look like
primitives.
In this way the user can build a larger language
to meet his needs.
But in
APL, new words defined by the user do not
look like language primitives at all.
The name
of a piece of user code is a word, but things
that are built in are named by strange
glyphs.
To add what look like new trick primitives,
to keep the feel of the language,
takes a real hacker and a ton of work.
This has stopped users from helping to grow
the
language.
APL has grown some, but the work has been
done by just the few programmers that
have the source code.
If a user adds to APL, and what he added seems
good to the hackers
in charge of the language, they might then
make it be built in, but code to use it would
not look the same; the user would have to
change his code to a new form, because in
APL a
use of what is built in does not look at all
like a call to user code.
Lisp was designed by one man, a smart man,
and it works in a way that I think he
did not plan for.
In Lisp, new words defined by the user look
like primitives and, what
is more, all primitives look like words defined
by the user.
In other words, if a user has
good taste in defining new words, what comes
out is a larger language that has no seams.
The designer in charge can grow the language
with close to no work on his part, just by
choosing with care from the work of many users.
And Lisp grew much faster than APL
did, because many users could try things out
and put their best code out there for other
users to use and to add to the language.
Lisp is not used quite as much as it used
to be, but parts of it live on in other
languages, the best of which is called garbage
collection-and I will not try to tell you
now what that means in words of one syllable—I
leave it to you as a task to try in your
spare time.
It is not that hard.
This leads me to claim that, from now on,
a main goal in designing a language should
be to plan for growth.
The language must start small, and the language
must grow as the
set of users grows.
I now think that I, as a language designer
helping out with the Java
programming language, need to ask not 'Should
the Java programming language grow?'
but 'How should the Java programming language
grow?'
There is more than one kind of growth and
more than one way to do it.
But, as we
shall see, if the goal is to be quick and
yet to do good work, one mode may be better
by
far than all other modes.
There are two kinds of growth in a language.
One can change the vocabulary, or one
can change the rules that say what a string
of words means.
A library is a vocabulary designed to be added
to a programming language to make its
vocabulary larger.
A true library does not change the rules of
meaning for the language;
it just adds new words.
You can see from this that, in my view, the
code that lets you do
a 'long jump' in C is not a true library.
Of course, there must be a way for a user
to make libraries.
But the key point is that
the new words defined by a library should
look just like the primitives of the language.
Some languages are like this and some are
not.
Those that are not are harder to grow with
the help of users.
It may be good as well to have a way to add
to the rules of meaning for a language.
Some ways to do this work better than others.
But in the same way, the language should let
work done by a user look just like what was
designed at the start.
I would like to grow
the Java brand programming language in such
a way that users can do more of this.
In the same way, there are two ways to do
the growing.
One is for one person-or
a small group-to be in charge and to take
in, test, judge, and add the work done by
other
persons.
The other way is to just put all the source
code out there, once things start to
work, and let each person do as he wills.
To have a person in charge can slow things
down,
but to have no one in charge makes it harder
to add up the work of many persons.
The way that I think is faster and better
than all others does both.
Put the source code
out there and let all persons play with it.
Have a person in charge who is a quick judge
of good work and who will take it in and shove
it back out fast.
You don’t have to use
what he ships, and you don’t have to give
back your work, but he gives all persons a
fast
way to spread new code to those who want it.
The best example of this way to do things
is Linux, which is an operating system, which
is a program that keeps track of other programs
in a computer and gives each its due in
time and space.
You like that?
You ought to read what Eric Raymond had to
say of how Linux came to be.
I shall
tell you a bit of it once I define two more
words for you.
A cathedral is a huge church.
It may be made of stone; it may fill you with
awe; but
the key thought, in the mind of Eric Raymond,
is that there is but one design, one grand
plan, which may take a long time—many years—to
make real.
As the years pass, few changes are made to
the plan.
Many, many persons are needed to
build it, but there is just one designer.
A bazaar is a place with many small shops
or stalls, where you can buy things from
many persons who are there to sell their wares.
The key thought here is that each one
sells what he wants to sell and each one buys
what he wants to buy.
There is no one plan
and each seller or buyer may change his mind
at any time.
Eric Raymond wrote a short work called 'The
Cathedral and the Bazaar' in which he
looks at how programs are built or have been
built in the past.
You can find it on his
web site.
He talks of how he built a mail fetching program
with the help of more
than two hundred users.
He quotes Fred Brooks as saying, 'More users
find more bugs,'
and backs him up with tales from this example
of building a program in the bazaar style.
As for the role of programmer in charge, Eric
Raymond says that it is fine to come
up with good thoughts, but much better to
know them when you see them in the works of
other persons.
You can get a lot more done that way.
Linux rose to its heights of fame
and wide use in much the same way, though
on a much larger scale.
To take this thought
to the far end of the line: it may be that
one could write an operating system by putting
a million apes to work at a million typing
machines, then just spotting the bits of good
work that come out by chance and pasting them
up to make a whole.
That might take a
long time, I guess.
Too bad.
But the key point of the bazaar is not that
you can get many persons to work with
you at a task, for cathedral builders had
a great deal of help, too.
Nor is the key point
that you get help with the designing as well
as with the building, though that in fact
is
a big win.
No, the key point is that in the bazaar style
of building a program or
designing a language or what you will, the
plan can change in real time to meet the needs
of those who are working on it.
This tends to make users stay with it as time
goes by;
they will take joy in working hard and helping
out if they know that their wants and needs
have some weight and their hard work can change
the plan for the better.
Their better.
Which brings me to the high point of my talk.
It seems, in the last few years, at least,
that if one is asked to speak at this meeting,
one must quote Christopher Alexander.
I
know a bit of his work, though not a lot,
and I must say thanks to Dick Gabriel for
pointing out to me a quote that has a lot
to do with the main point of this talk.
I am sad to say that I do not know what this
quote means, because Christopher Alexander
uses many words of more than one syllable
and does not define them first.
But I have
learned to say these words by rote and it
may be that you out there can glean some
thoughts of use to you.
Christopher Alexander says:
Master plans have two additional unhealthy
characteristics.
To begin with,
the existence of a master plan alienates the
users ... After all, the very existence
of a master plan means, by definition, that
the members of the community
can have little impact on the future shape
of their community, because most
of the important decisions have already been
made.
In a sense, under a master
plan people are living with a frozen future,
able to affect only relatively trivial
details.
When people lose the sense of responsibility
for the environment they
live in, and realize that they are merely
cogs in someone else’s machine, how
can they feel any sense of identification
with the community, or any sense of
purpose there?
I think this means, in part, that it is good
to give your users a chance to buy in and
to pitch in.
It is good for them and it is good for you.
In point of fact, a number of
cathedrals were built in the bazaar mode.
Does this mean, then, that it is of no use
to design?
Not at all.
But in stead of
designing a thing, you need to design a way
of doing.
And this way of doing must make
some choices now but leave other choices to
a later time.
Which brings me to the word you have all been
waiting for: a pattern is a plan that has
some number of parts and shows you how each
part turns a face to the other parts, how
each joins with the others or stands off,
how each part does what it does and how the
other parts aid it or drag it down, and how
all the parts may be grasped as a whole and
made to serve as one thing, for some higher
goal or as part of a larger pattern.
A pattern
should give hints or clues as to when and
where it is best put to use.
What is more, some
of the parts of a pattern may be holes, or
slots, in which other things may be placed
later.
A good pattern will say how changes can be
made in the course of time.
Thus
some choices of the plan are built in as part
of the pattern, and other choices wait till
the time when the pattern is to be used.
In this way a pattern stands for a design
space
in which you can choose, on the fly, your
own path for growth and change.
It is good to design a thing, but it can be
far better-and far harder-to design a
pattern.
Best of all is to know when to use a pattern.
Now for some more computer words.
A datum is a set of bits that has a meaning;
data is the mass noun for a set of datums.
An object is a datum the meanings of whose
parts is laid down by a set of language
rules.
In the Java programming language, these rules
use types to make clear which parts
of an object may cite other objects.
Objects may be grouped to form classes.
Knowing the class of an object tells you most
of what you need to know of how that object
acts.
Objects may have fields; each field of an
object can hold a datum.
Which datum it
holds may change from time to time.
Each field may have a type, which tells you
what
data can be in that field at run time-and,
what is more, it tells you what data can not
be in that field at run time.
A method is a named piece of code that is
part of an object.
If you can name or cite
an object, then you can call a method of that
object; the method then does its thing.
The Java programming language has objects
and classes and fields and methods and
types.
Now I shall speak of some things that the
Java programming language does not yet
have.
A generic type is a map from one or more types
to types.
Put another way, a generic
type is a pattern for building types.
A number of groups of persons have set forth
ways
to add generic types to the Java programming
language; each way has its
own good points.
We heard three talks on adding generic types
to the Java programming language at this
meeting less than three and twenty hours ago.
An operator is a glyph, such as a plus sign,
that can be used in a language as if it were
a word.
In the C or the Java programming language,
as in English, the sign first known as
'and per se and' is an operator, but a full
stop or quote mark is not an operator.
A word is said to be overloaded if it is made
to mean two or more things and the hearer
has to choose the meaning based on the rest
of what is said.
For example, using the rules
defined near the start of this talk, a verb
form such as 'painted' might be a past tense
or a past participle, and it is up to you,
the hearer, to make the call as to which I
mean
when I say it.
Sometimes an overloaded word is called polymorphic,
which means that the
word has many forms; but the truth is that
the word has but one form, and many meanings.
The definition of a word may be polymorphic,
but the word as such is not.
An operator can be overloaded in C plus plus,
but right now operators in the Java
programming language can not be overloaded
by the programmer, even though the names of
methods may be overloaded.
I would like to change that.
I have said in the past, and will say now,
that I think it would be a good thing for
the Java programming language to add generic
types and to let the user define overloaded
operators.
Just as a user can code methods in just the
same way as methods that are built
in, the user ought to have a way to define
operators for user defined classes that can
be
used in just the same way as operators that
are built in.
What is more, I would add a kind
of class that is of light weight, one whose
objects can be cloned at will with no harm
and
so could be kept on a stack for speed and
not just in the heap.
Classes of this kind would
be well suited for use as user defined number
types but would have other uses, too.
You
can find a plan for all this on a web page
by James Gosling.
There are a few other things we could add
as well, such as tail calls and ways to read
and
write those machine flags for numbers whose
points float.
But these are small language
tweaks next to generic types and overloaded
operators.
If we grow the language in these few ways,
then I think we will not need to grow it in
a
hundred other ways; the users can take on
the rest of the task.
To see why, think on these
examples.
A complex number is a pair of numbers.
There are rules for how to find the sum of
two
complex numbers, or a complex number times
a complex number.
Some programmers like to use them lot; others
do not use them at all.
So should we make
'complex number' a type in the Java programming
language?
Some say yes, of course; many
others say no.
A rational number is a pair of numbers.
There are rules-not the same as the rules
for complex numbers, of course-for how to
find the sum of two rational numbers, or a
rational number times a rational number.
A few programmers like to use them a lot;
most do not use them at all.
So should we make
'rational number' a type in the Java programming
language?
An interval is a pair of numbers.
There are rules-not the same as the rules
for complex
numbers or rational numbers, of course-for
how to find the sum of two intervals, or an
interval times an interval.
A few programmers like to use them a lot and
wish all the other programmers who use
numbers would use them, too; but most do not
use them at all.
So should we make
'interval' a type in the Java programming
language?
John Horton Conway once defined a game to
be a pair of sets of games- see his book
On Numbers and Games- then pointed out that
some games may be thought of as
numbers that say how many moves it will take
to win the game.
There are rules for how
to find the sum of two games, and so on.
From this he worked out for hundreds of kinds
of real games how to know which player will
win.
I think, oh, three persons in the world know
how to use this kind of number.
Should
we make it a type in the Java programming
language?
A vector is a row of numbers all of the same
type, with each place in the row named
by the kind of number we first spoke of in
this talk.
There are rules ... In fact, for
vectors of length three there are two ways
to do 'a vector times a vector,' so you can
have twice the fun!
Vectors of length three or four are a great
aid in making bits on the screen look like
scenes in the real world.
So should we make 'vector' a type in the Java
programming
language?
A matrix is a set of numbers laid out in a
square.
And there are rules.
So should we make
'matrix' a type in the Java programming language?
And so on, and so on, and so on.
I might say 'yes' to each one of these, but
it is clear that I must say 'no' to all of
them!
And so would James Gosling and Bill Joy.
To add them all to the Java programming
language would be just too much.
Some parts of the programming vocabulary are
fit for
all programmers to use, but other parts are
just for their own niches.
It would not be
fair to weigh down all programmers with the
need to have or to learn all the words for
every niche used.
We should not make the Java programming language
a cathedral, but a
plain bazaar might be too loose.
What we need is more like a shopping mall,
where there
are not quite as many choices but most of
the goods are well designed and sellers stand
up
and back what they sell.
I could speak at length on the ways in which
a shopping mall is
like a cathedral—but not here, not now!
Now, the user could define objects for such
numbers to have methods that act in the
right ways, but code to use such numbers would
look strange and be slow.
Programmers used
to adding numbers with plus signs would kvetch.
In fact, the Java programming language
does have a class of 'big numbers' that have
methods for adding them and telling which
is
larger and all the rest, and you can not use
the plus sign to add such numbers, and
programmers who have to use them do kvetch.
Generic types and overloaded operators would
let a user code up all of these, and in
such a way that they would look in all ways
just like types that are built in.
They would
let users grow the Java programming language
in a smooth and clean way.
And it would
not be just for numbers; generic types would
be good for coding hash sets, for example,
and there are many other uses.
And each user would not have to code up such
number classes, each for his own use.
When a language gives you the right tools,
such classes can be coded by a few and then
put up as libraries for other users to use,
or not, as they choose; but they don’t have
to
be built in as part of the base language.
If you give a person a fish, he can eat for
a day.
If you teach a person to fish, he can eat
his whole life long.
If you give a person tools, he can make a
fishing pole—and lots of other tools!
He can
build a machine to crank out fishing poles.
In this way he can help other persons to catch
fish.
Meta means that you step back from your own
place.
What you used to do is now what
you see.
What you were is now what you act on.
Verbs turn to nouns.
What you used
to think of as a pattern is now treated as
a thing to put in the slot of an other pattern.
A meta foo is a foo in whose slots you can
put parts of a foo.
In a way, a language design of the old school
is a pattern for programs.
But now we
need to 'go meta.'
We should now think of a language design as
a pattern for language
designs, a tool for making more tools of the
same kind.
This is the nub of what I want to say.
A language design can no longer be a thing.
It
must be a pattern—a pattern for growth—a
pattern for growing the pattern for defining
the patterns that programmers can use for
their real work and their main goal.
My point is that a good programmer in these
times does not just write programs.
A good programmer builds a working vocabulary.
In other words, a good programmer
does language design, though not from scratch,
but by building on the frame of a base
language.
In the course of giving this talk, because
I started with a small language, I have had
to define fifty or more new words or phrases
and sixteen names of persons or things; and
I laid out six rules for making new words
from old ones.
In this way I added to the base
language.
If I were to write a book by starting from
just the words of one syllable, I am
sure that I would have to define hundreds
of new words.
It should give no one pause to
note that the writing of a program a million
lines of code in length might need many, many
hundreds of new words—that is to say, a
new language built up on the base language.
I will
be so bold as to say that it can be done in
no other way.
Well— there may be one other
way, which is to use a large, rich programming
language that has grown over
tens or hundreds of years, that has all we
need to say what we want to say, that we are
taught as we grow up and take for granted.
It may be that a hundred years from now
there will be a programming language that
by then has stood the test of time, needs
no
more changes for most uses, and is used by
all persons who write programs because each
child learns it in school.
But that is not where we are now.
So.
Language design is not at all the same kind
of work it was thirty years ago, or
twenty years ago.
Back then, you could set out to design a whole
language and then build
it by your own self, or with a small team,
because it was small and because what you
would then do with it was small.
Now programs are big messes with many needs.
A small language won’t do the job.
If you design a big language all at once and
then try to build it all at once, it will
fail.
You will end up late and some other small
language will take your place.
It would be
great if there were some small programming
language that felt large, the way Basic English
is small but feels large in some ways.
But I don’t know how to do it and I have
good cause
to doubt that it can be done at all.
In its day, APL was a small language that
felt large;
but our needs have grown and APL did not have
a good pattern for growth.
So I think the sole way to win is to plan
for growth.
To plan for growth with help from
users.
This is a win for you because you have help.
This is a win for the users because they get
to have their say and get to bend the growth
to their needs.
But you need to have one or
more persons, too, or one or more groups,
to take on the task of judging and testing
and
sifting what the users do and say, and adding
what they think best to the big pile of
code, in the hope that other users will trust
what they say and not have to go to all the
work to test and judge and sift each new claim
or each new piece of code, each for his own
self.
Parts of the language must be designed to
help the task of growth- of growing the
language.
A good set of types, ways for a user to define
new types, to add new words and
new rules to the language, to define and use
all sorts of patterns—all these are needed.
The designer should not, for example, define
twenty kinds of number types in the language.
But there will be users who, all told, beg
for twenty different kinds of numbers.
Different.
Beg for twenty kinds of numbers.
This is hard.
The language should have a way for the user
to define number types that work well with
each other, and with plus signs and other
such signs, and with the many ways of pushing
bits in and out of the computer.
One might define just one or two number types
at the
start, to show how it ought to be done.
Then leave the rest to the users.
Help them all as
best you can to work side by side- and not
nose to nose.
You may find that you need to add warts as
part of the design, so that you can get it
out the door fast, with the goal of taking
out the warts at a later time.
Now, there are
warts and then there are warts!
With care, one can design a wart so that it
will not be
too hard to take out or patch up later on.
But if you do not take care at the start,
you
may be stuck for years to come with a wart
you did not plan.
Some warts are not bad things you put in,
but good things you leave out.
Have a plan
to add those good things at a later time,
if you should choose to do so, and make sure
that other parts of your design don’t cut
you off from adding those good things when
the
time is right.
I hope to bring these thoughts to bear on
the Java programming language.
The Java
programming language has done as well as it
has up to now because it started small- I
think.
It was not hard to learn and it was not hard
to port.
It has grown quite a bit
since then.
If the design of the Java programming language
as it is now had been put forth
three years ago, it would have failed— of
that I am sure.
Programmers would have cried,
'Too big!
Too much hair!
I can’t deal with all that!'
But in real life it has worked out
fine because the users have grown with the
language and learned it piece by piece, and
they buy in to it because they have had some
say in how to change the language.
And the Java programming language needs to
grow yet some more—but, I hope, not a lot
more.
At least, I think only a few more rules are
needed—the rest can be done with libraries,
most of them built by users and not by Sun.
If we add hundreds of new things to the Java
brand programming language, we will have
a huge language, but it will take a long time
to get there.
But if we add a few
things— just the right things- generic types,
operator overloading, user defined types of
light weight, for use as numbers and small
vectors and such— and some other things-
that
are designed to let users make and add things
for their own use, I think we can go a long
way, and much faster.
We need to put tools for language growth in
the hands of the users.
I hope that we can, in this way or some other
way, design a programming language
where we don’t seem to spend most of our
time talking and writing in words of just
one
syllable.
One of the good things I can say for short
words is that they make for short talks.
They gave me an hour and a half for this talk,
and I have used less than an hour.
Once
I am done you will have time to go out in
the hall, have a cup of tea and talk with
your
friends.
But first I would like to tell you what I
have learned from the task of designing this
talk.
In choosing to give up the many long words
that I have come to know since I was a
child, words that have many fine shades of
meaning, I made this task much harder than
it
needs to be.
I hope that you have not found it too hard
on your ears.
But I found that
sticking to this rule made me think.
I had to take time to think through how to
phrase
each thought.
And there was this choice for each new word:
is it worth the work to define
it, or should I just stick with the words
I have?
Should I do the work of defining a new
word such as mirror, or should I just say
'looking glass' each time I want to speak
of
one?
As an example, I was tempted more than once
to state the 'ly' rule for making new words
that change what verbs mean, but in the end
I chose to cast all such words to one side
and
make do.
And I came that close to defining the word
without, but each time, for better or
for worse, I found some other way to phrase
my thought.
I learned in my youth, from the books of such
great teachers of writing as Strunk and
White, that it is better to choose short words
when I can.
I should not choose long,
hard words just to make other persons think
that I know a lot.
I should try to make my
thoughts clear; if they are clear and right,
then other persons can judge my work as it
ought to be judged.
And I'm sure you will.
From the work of planning this talk, in which
I have tried to go with this rule- of short
words- much farther than in the past, I found
that for the most part they were right.
Short words work well, if we choose them well.
Thus I think that programming languages need
to be more like the languages we
speak— but it might be good, too, if we
were to use the languages we speak more in
the
way that we now use programming languages.
All in all, I think it might be a good thing
if those who rule our lives—those in high
places who do the work of state, those who
judge what we do, and most of all those who
make the laws—were made to define their
terms and to say all else that they say in
words
of one syllable.
For I have found that this mode of speech
makes it hard to hedge.
It takes
work, and great care, and some skill, to find
just the right way to say what you want to
say, but in the end you seem to have no choice
but to talk straight.
If you do not veer
wide of the truth, you are forced to hit it
dead on.
I urge you, too, to give it a try.
Thank you.